>> IT'S THE UFO CASE THAT
DOMINATES ALL OTHERS. BUT IT MAY
ONLY BE HALF THE STORY.
>> ROSWELL HAS ALWAYS BEEN
AN AMAZING MYSTERY.
>> IN JULY 1947, SOMETHING
CRASHES OUTSIDE OF ROSWELL,
NEW MEXICO. AND DAYS BEFORE,
STRANGE OBJECTS ARE SIGHTED NEAR
THE LOCAL ARMY AIR FIELD.
>> THEY WERE OFF THE CORNER OF
THAT HANGAR THERE.
>> NOW, THE ROSWELL MYSTERY
TAKES AN INCREDIBLE TURN.
FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER,
PHYSICAL EVIDENCE SUGGESTS THAT
THERE WASN'T ONE CRASH BUT 2.
>> WELL, AT FIRST, I WASN'T SURE
IT HAD ANYTHING TO DO WITH
A UFO CRASH. BUT I STARTED
FINDING THINGS.
>> STRANGE ARTIFACTS FROM
THE SUPPOSED LOCATION OF
THE SECOND CRASH...
>> HAVE YOU EVER SEEN ANYTHING
LIKE THIS BEFORE?
>> NOTHING OF THIS SHAPE
AND FORM.
>> AFTER 61 YEARS, A NEW WITNESS
STEPS FORWARD.
>> MAKES CHILLS RUN DOWN
MY BACK.
>> THE REAL STORY BEHIND ROSWELL
WAITS TO BE UNEARTHED.
>> IF I WANTED TO GET RID OF
MY UFO DEBRIS, THIS WOULD BE
A NICE PLACE TO PUT IT.
>> THIS IS CASE NUMBER 47402--
THE REAL ROSWELL.
>> ♪ YEAH, YEAH, YEAH, YEAH...
[ROCK MUSIC PLAYING]
YEAH, YEAH, YEAH, YEAH ♪
>> EARLY JULY 1947,
ROSWELL, NEW MEXICO, IS A QUIET
CITY OF JUST 26,000 PEOPLE.
THE MAJORITY OF THE POPULATION
ARE RANCHERS OR MILITARY
BASED AT THE NEARBY
ROSWELL ARMY AIR FIELD.
LITTLE DO ANY OF THEM KNOW,
THIS SLEEPY TOWN IS ABOUT TO
RECEIVE A WAKE-UP CALL.
[WIND WHISTLING]
ON JULY 6, LOCAL RANCHER
MACK BRAZEL REPORTS TO THE LOCAL
SHERIFF THAT HE HAS FOUND
STRANGE DEBRIS ON THE RANCH
WHERE HE WORKS.
MAJOR JESSE MARCEL FROM
ROSWELL ARMY AIR FIELD IS
SENT OUT TO INVESTIGATE.
HE TAKES AS MUCH OF THE DEBRIS
AS HE CAN FIT IN HIS TRUCK
BACK TO THE BASE.
ON JULY 8, THE ARMY ISSUES
A STATEMENT THAT THEY ARE IN
POSSESSION OF A FLYING SAUCER.
BUT AFTER THE DEBRIS IS FLOWN TO
DALLAS, TEXAS, THAT AFTERNOON
FOR FURTHER ANALYSIS, THE ARMY
STATES THE DEBRIS IS NOTHING BUT
A MISIDENTIFIED WEATHER BALLOON.
THE STORY QUICKLY FADES
FROM MEMORY.
BUT IN 1978, STANTON FRIEDMAN,
A RETIRED NUCLEAR PHYSICIST,
INTERVIEWS JESSE MARCEL,
WHO HAS A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT
TAKE ON THE STORY.
MARCEL REVEALS TO FRIEDMAN THAT
WHAT WAS SAID THAT AFTERNOON
IN DALLAS ON JULY 8, 1947,
WAS ACTUALLY A COVER STORY.
WHAT HE HANDLED WAS DEFINITELY
NOT A WEATHER BALLOON.
THE ROSWELL MYSTERY EXPLODES.
IN THE 15 YEARS FOLLOWING
FRIEDMAN'S EXPLOSIVE INTERVIEW
WITH JESSE MARCEL, CRIES OF
COVER-UP AND CONSPIRACY CLOUD
THE ROSWELL INCIDENT.
FINALLY, IN 1994, THE GOVERNMENT
DECIDES TO TELL ALL.
THE AIR FORCE ISSUES AN OFFICIAL
REPORT SAYING THAT THE DEBRIS
RECOVERED AT ROSWELL WAS FROM
A TOP-SECRET PROGRAM CALLED
PROJECT MOGUL. THESE CLASSIFIED
EXERCISES WERE USED TO SPY ON
SOVIET MISSILE AND BOMB TESTS.
FOR MANY, THE LONGSTANDING
DEBATE OVER WHAT HAPPENED IN
1947 IN ROSWELL, NEW MEXICO,
IS PUT TO REST. BUT SOME
ARE NOT CONVINCED.
NOW, THERE IS ANOTHER CHAPTER
TO THE ROSWELL STORY. IN RECENT
YEARS, MORE AND MORE UFO
RESEARCHERS ARE PAYING CLOSER
ATTENTION TO A SECOND REPORTED
CRASH THAT HAPPENED THE SAME
WEEK AS ROSWELL, 250 MILES AWAY
ON THE PLAINS OF SAN AUGUSTIN.
61 YEARS AFTER THESE EVENTS,
TIME IS RUNNING OUT. RESEARCHERS
RUSH TO COLLECT TESTIMONY AND
PHYSICAL EVIDENCE BEFORE IT
DISAPPEARS FOREVER.
DR. TED ACWORTH WILL INVESTIGATE
THE ALLEGED SECOND CRASH SITE
IN THE PLAINS OF SAN AUGUSTIN.
>> THIS IS THE FAMOUS CASE.
IT'S ROSWELL. IT'S PROBABLY
THE DOMINANT UFO CASE OF
ALL HISTORY.
>> BILL BIRNES WILL MEET WITH
A RESEARCHER WHO'S FOUND A NEW
WITNESS FROM THE ORIGINAL CRASH
SITE--ONE WHO MAY HAVE SEEN AND
HANDLED THE ACTUAL DEBRIS.
>> ROSWELL HAS ALWAYS BEEN FOR
ME AN AMAZING MYSTERY THAT,
EVER SINCE I WAS A KID,
I'VE WANTED TO SOLVE.
>> AND PAT USKERT WILL SEARCH
FOR PHYSICAL EVIDENCE THAT IS
RUMORED TO BE HIDDEN ON REMOTE
RANCHES OUTSIDE OF TOWN.
>> THIS IS THE ULTIMATE
UFO EVENT TO ATTEND, BILL.
YOU KNOW, I CAN'T BELIEVE
WE'RE HERE. I'M REALLY EXCITED
ABOUT THIS.
>> THIS IS WHEN--YOU WANT
TO STUDY ABOUT UFOs IN
THE UNITED STATES, YOU COME
TO ROSWELL, AND THIS IS WHERE
YOU BEGIN.
>> WE'RE HERE.
>> BILL BEGINS BY MEETING
ROSWELL RESEARCHER
DENNIS BALTHASER, A LOCAL
CONTACT WHO DETAILS THE NEW
DIRECTION THE INVESTIGATION
HAS TAKEN.
>> THERE'S AN URGENCY ABOUT
THIS. WHAT IS THE URGENCY?
>> WE'RE RUNNING OUT OF TIME.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE THAT
ARE IN THEIR EIGHTIES--IF
THEY'RE STILL ALIVE--THAT WERE
HERE, AND THE FACT THAT WE HAVE
NOTHING PHYSICAL, REALLY, FOR
THE ROSWELL INCIDENT.
IF THERE IS METAL OUT THERE--
AND I'M SURE THERE IS, BECAUSE
OF THE NUMBER OF GUYS THAT WERE
AT THE CRASH SITE TO HELP CLEAN
IT UP--IT COULD BE KEPT
ANYWHERE. I THINK LOOKING AT
THE PLAINS OF SAN AUGUSTIN AND
ROSWELL AS A COMBINATION--OR
EVEN SEPARATELY--I THINK THAT
NEEDS TO BE WORKED SOME MORE.
>> THE IDEA OF A SECOND
CRASH SITE IN THE ROSWELL
INCIDENT IS A THEORY STARTING
TO GAIN TRACTION.
THIS POSSIBLE SECOND SITE,
LOCATED IN THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN, IS APPROXIMATELY
250 MILES FROM THE MAIN
ROSWELL CRASH SITE.
AND THIS SITE COULD PROVIDE
MUCH-NEEDED EVIDENCE TO BACK UP
THE ROSWELL INCIDENT.
ONE OF THE BIGGEST PROPONENTS OF
THIS THEORY IS STANTON FRIEDMAN,
THE ORIGINAL INVESTIGATOR WHO
BROKE THE ROSWELL CASE WIDE OPEN
30 YEARS AGO.
>> I HAD HEARD THE FIRST STORY
ABOUT ROSWELL, AND I HAD HEARD
THE FIRST STORY ABOUT THE PLANS
OF SAN AUGUSTIN. AND I FOLLOWED
UP ON BOTH, OF COURSE, AND FOUND
SUFFICIENT OTHER EVIDENCE TO
BELIEVE THAT THERE WERE AT LEAST
2 SITES.
>> WHERE DOES IT LEAD US WITH
RESPECT TO MULTIPLE CRASH SITES?
>> I THINK YOU NEEDED TO SEE
THIS SITE--SEE HOW BARREN IT IS,
THE STRANGE AREA IT IS--AND
NOTICE THAT ANY PILOT WOULD COME
DOWN IN THE MIDDLE OF THE PLAINS
INSTEAD OF HIT ONE OF THOSE
MOUNTAINS AROUND THERE. HEH.
MAKES SENSE. THAT'S WHAT
PILOTS DO.
>> THE STORY OF THIS OTHER CRASH
HAPPENS IN EARLY JULY 1947 AS
WELL, THOUGH THE EXACT DATE IS
STILL HOTLY DEBATED.
A MAN NAMED BARNEY BARNETT
ALLEGEDLY DISCOVERS A DOWNED
CRAFT, INCLUDING DEAD ALIEN
BODIES, EARLY ONE JULY MORNING.
HE CLAIMS THE MILITARY ARRIVES
AT THE SITE SOON AFTER HE DOES
AND ORDERS HIM TO KEEP QUIET
ABOUT WHAT HE'S SEEN.
>> REMEMBER, BARNEY WAS
A WORLD WAR I VETERAN. HE WORKED
FOR THE SOIL CONSERVATION
SERVICE. IT WOULD BE RIDICULOUS
TO EXPECT HIM TO JUST
GO TALKING.
>> SO, WHAT WE HAVE IS A STORY
THAT BARNEY BARNETT WAS ON
THE PLAINS OF SAN AUGUSTIN...
>> FOUND WRECKAGE. THERE WERE
PEOPLE THERE, INCLUDING
AN ARCHAEOLOGIST, AND INCLUDING
STUDENTS. AND THE MILITARY
CAME ALONG--TOLD EVERYBODY TO
SHUT UP. AND THEY MEANT IT VERY
STRONG. REMEMBER, THIS IS '47.
>> AND YOU SHUT UP WHEN YOU WERE
TOLD TO SHUT UP.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> BUT WHY WOULD THERE BE 2 UFO
CRASHES SO CLOSE TOGETHER DURING
THE SAME WEEK? IS IT POSSIBLE
THEY ARE LINKED IN SOME WAY? THE
THEORIES BEHIND THESE ALLEGED
CRASHES NEED FURTHER ANALYSIS
BEFORE THE INVESTIGATION VISITS
EITHER SITE.
>> DO WE KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT
THE RELATIVE POSITIONS OF THESE
DEBRIS FIELDS? ARE THEY
SCATTERED RANDOMLY ACROSS
ONE KIND OF AREA, OR ARE THEY
IN LINE, OR...
>> WELL, MOST OF THE DEBRIS
FIELDS ARE AROUND ROSWELL. THEY
ARE AROUND THE MAIN CRASH SITE.
HOWEVER, THERE'S ANOTHER ONE
200 MILES AWAY ON THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN.
>> I MEAN, IT SEEMS PRETTY
UNLIKELY--THAT SECOND CRASH SITE
200 MILES AWAY--THAT IT COULD BE
SOME SORT OF PRIMARY VEHICLE
THAT HIT AND THEN BOUNCED.
I'M NOT FAMILIAR WITH ANY
VEHICLES BEING ABLE TO BOUNCE
OR DEBRIS BOUNCING LIKE THAT.
>> MM-HMM. ANOTHER THEORY
IS THAT THERE WERE 2 CRAFT
THAT MAYBE SOMEHOW COLLIDED
IN MIDAIR AND CREATED A SORT OF
A CUE BALL EFFECT WHERE ONE
CRAFT EXPLODED, RAINED DEBRIS
DOWN OVER THE ROSWELL AREA,
AND THE SECOND CRAFT--
>> [INDISTINCT]
>> EXACTLY--WAS SORT OF
CUE-BALLED OVER TO THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN.
>> MM-HMM.
>> AND SO, WE HAVE BASICALLY
2 CRAFT AND 2 CRASHES.
>> MM-HMM.
>> LINKING THE 2 CRASHES
AT ROSWELL AND SAN AUGUSTIN
WILL BE A KEY FOCUS OF
THE INVESTIGATION. TOM CAREY,
A RESEARCHER OF THE ORIGINAL
CRASH, HAS UNCOVERED A STUNNING
NEW WITNESS WHO CLAIMS HE WAS AT
THIS SITE--A STAFF SERGEANT AT
ROSWELL ARMY AIR FIELD IN 1947.
HIS NAME IS EARL FULFORD.
>> I CALLED EARL FULFORD 3 YEARS
AGO. HE WAS JUST A FACE IN
THE BASE YEARBOOK. I CALLED HIS
NUMBER, AND HIS WIFE ANSWERED.
AND MUCH TO MY SURPRISE, SHE
SAID, "I'M GLAD YOU CALLED. HE'S
READY TO TALK."
>> CAREY IDENTIFIED EARL THROUGH
THE OFFICIAL BASE YEARBOOK FROM
1947. THIS IS THE FIRST TIME HE
HAS EVER SPOKEN ABOUT THE EVENTS
HE WITNESSED.
>> WHAT HAPPENED TO GET YOU
INVOLVED WITH THIS ROSWELL
INCIDENT AFTER YOU WERE ON
THE BASE?
>> WELL, UH, IT HAPPENED. WE
WORKED OVER HERE IN THE NEXT
HANGAR. AND ABOUT 2 OR 3 WEEKS
BEFORE THE INCIDENT, THE PEOPLE
IN TOWN, ESPECIALLY, AND SOME
AIRMEN HERE ON THE BASE STARTED
SEEING OBJECTS IN THE SKY.
>> WHERE WERE THE OBJECTS?
>> THEY WERE OFF THE CORNER OF
THAT...HANGAR THERE.
>> EARL DESCRIBES THE OBJECTS
AS UNLIKE ANY AIRCRAFT HE HAD
EVER SEEN.
>> WE LOOKED UP, AND THERE WAS
3 UP THERE. THEY WERE CIRCULAR
AND...HUNG MOTIONLESS.
AND WE PROBABLY WATCHED THEM FOR
A COUPLE MINUTES. AND THEY
SUDDENLY DISAPPEARED.
>> AND THIS WAS BEFORE ANYTHING
EVER HAPPENED ON THE--
>> YEAH. THAT'S RIGHT. IT WAS
WITHIN DAYS, MAYBE A WEEK,
WHEN THE CRASH OCCURRED.
>> THIS DESCRIPTION DOESN'T
MATCH THE APPEARANCE OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S PROJECT MOGUL
BALLOONS, WHICH HAD EXTREMELY
LONG TRAINS OF VARIOUS MATERIALS
AND WERE USED PRIMARILY AT HIGH
ALTITUDES. MILITARY SERVICEMEN
WOULD BE UNLIKELY TO SEE THEM
SO LOW IN THE ATMOSPHERE.
BUT SPOTTING THE STRANGE ORBS
IS ONLY THE BEGINNING OF
EARL'S STORY.
>> THE NEXT DAY, SERGEANT
ROSENBERG CAME IN THE MESS HALL
AT 5 A.M. AND GOT 12 OR 15 OR
MAYBE 20 OF US AND LOADED US UP
ON AN ARMY BUS AND TOOK US TO
THE DEBRIS FIELD ABOUT 70 MILES
NORTH OF ROSWELL.
>> AND WHAT DID YOU DO THERE?
>> PICKED UP SOME DEBRIS OF
A VERY UNUSUAL SHAPE AND FEEL
AND APPEARANCE.
>> WHAT WAS THE DEBRIS THAT
EARL FULFORD AND OTHER
VOLUNTEERS PICKED UP IN 1947?
THE ANSWER MAY STILL LIE HIDDEN
BENEATH THE DESERT.
>> SHOW NO FEAR.
>> IN ROSWELL, NEW MEXICO, A NEW
WITNESS TO THE ROSWELL INCIDENT
HAS COME FORWARD FOR THE FIRST
TIME. EARL FULFORD,
A STAFF SERGEANT AT ROSWELL
ARMY AIR FIELD IN 1947,
FINDS HIMSELF RECRUITED FOR
CLEANUP DUTY. BUT THIS IS
NO ORDINARY CLEANUP.
PAT AND BILL ARE BRINGING EARL
AND RESEARCHER TOM CAREY TO
THE ORIGINAL ROSWELL CRASH SITE
TO GET FIRSTHAND DETAILS ABOUT
THE DEBRIS RECOVERED THERE ON
JULY 8, 1947.
WHILE THEY HEAD TO THE FIRST
SITE, TED IS PREPPING THE
INVESTIGATION'S NEXT STEP--
A VISIT TO A POSSIBLE SECOND
CRASH SITE ON THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN 250 MILES AWAY.
>> EARL, IF I WANT TO GO TO
THE CRASH SITE, WHICH WAY DO
I WANT TO TURN NOW?
>> YOU TAKE A LEFT RIGHT THERE
ON THAT ROAD. IT'S IN A HIGH
AREA LIKE THAT OVER THERE.
>> OK. WHAT DOES IT FEEL LIKE
GOING BACK?
>> I FEEL ELATED TO BE ABLE TO
DO SOMETHING LIKE THIS AT
82 YEARS OLD.
>> UH-HUH.
>> SHOW NO FEAR.
>> AFTER NEARLY 3 HOURS OF
DRIVING, INCLUDING AN HOUR
OFF-ROAD, THE TEAM ARRIVES AT
THEIR DESTINATION.
THIS IS THE FAMOUS ROSWELL
CRASH SITE. ON THIS BARREN
LANDSCAPE, MANY CLAIM HISTORY
WAS MADE. RIGHT HERE, FOR THE
FIRST AND, SO, FAR ONLY TIME,
THE UNITED STATES MILITARY
ADMITTED TO FINDING A UFO, ONLY
TO CHANGE ITS STORY DAYS LATER.
>> SO, EARL, DO YOU REMEMBER
THIS SITE?
>> YES. WE PICKED UP
MATERIAL HERE IN ABOUT
A ONE-SQUARE-MILE AREA.
>> SO, YOU WERE HERE PRETTY MUCH
THE WHOLE DAY?
>> YEAH, THE BIGGER PART OF
A DAY.
>> EARL DESCRIBES THE FIELD AS
A FAN SPREADING OUT OVER ONE
SQUARE MILE. AND ACCORDING TO
HIM, THE DEBRIS WAS EVERYWHERE.
>> VEHICLES ALL DROVE UP AND,
LIKE, FORMED A CIRCLE. WE
STARTED WALKING IN ONE
DIRECTION. WE WENT ABOUT 10, 12,
15 APART--WHERE I COULD SEE WHAT
YOU COULD SEE, AND YOU COULD SEE
WHAT I COULD SEE--SO WE WOULDN'T
MISS ANYTHING. WELL, I SEEN SOME
TYPE OF MATERIAL OR METAL OR
SOMETHING THAT LOOKED, UH,
SORT OF LIKE ALUMINUM. IT WAS
SHREDS AND PIECES.
>> NOW, WHEN YOU PICKED IT UP
AND TRIED TO PUT IT IN YOUR
SACK, WHAT HAPPENED?
>> WELL, MY PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
WAS GREAT SURPRISE. WHEN
I PICKED UP A PIECE AND I WADDED
IT UP TO PUT IN MY BAG, AND
BEFORE IT GETS THERE, IT
CAME BACK TO ITS ORIGINAL SHAPE.
>> WOW.
>> AND I TOOK IT OUT AND
I WADDED IT UP AGAIN, AND
SAME THING.
>> OTHER WITNESSES HAVE
EXPLAINED WHAT HAPPENED WHEN
PEOPLE BROUGHT DEBRIS BACK FROM
THIS VERY SITE. BUT EARL WAS
THERE AT THE BEGINNING. HE SAW
THE MATERIAL ON THE GROUND. HE
EXPLAINED THE SHOCK WHEN HE
PICKED UP A PIECE OF WHAT LOOKED
LIKE FOIL, TARNISHED CHROME
FOIL, CRUSHED IT IN HIS HAND,
WENT TO PUT IT IN THE SACK, AND
IT POPPED OPEN AGAIN.
ABOUT HOW MANY PIECES DO YOU
THINK THAT YOU GATHERED IN YOUR
OWN GUNNYSACK?
>> I WOULD SAY I PICKED UP
10, 12, MAYBE 15 PIECES. BUT
ONCE IT WENT IN THOSE BAGS, WE
NEVER SEEN IT AGAIN.
>> DO YOU REMEMBER WHAT ARMY
PERSONNEL TOOK POSSESSION OF
THE BAGS?
>> THEY WERE MILITARY POLICE.
>> IT IS THE LAST TIME EARL WILL
SEE OR HERE OF THE DEBRIS.
>> THEY TOLD ME UP THERE IF
I SHOWED ANYONE OR TOLD ANYONE,
I WAS IN DEEP TROUBLE.
>> WE'VE GOTTEN A NEW
PERSPECTIVE ON ROSWELL TODAY,
BECAUSE EARL FULFORD WAS ABLE TO
EXPLAIN TO US WHAT IT WAS LIKE
BEING HERE. NOW WE CAN GO TO
THE NEXT STEP.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF WE'LL HAVE
ANY LUCK FINDING ANY MORE
WITNESSES, AND I DON'T THINK WE
CAN FIND A WITNESS BETTER THAN
EARL FULFORD. SO, THE THING
I WOULD WANT TO DO NOW IS SEE
IF THERE'S ANY WAY WE CAN
COME UP WITH EVEN THE SMALLEST
BIT OF DEBRIS.
>> WITH THIS FIRSTHAND
INFORMATION FROM EARL, TED LOOKS
AT CREATING AN EXPERIMENT WITH
CONVENTIONAL MATERIALS TO SEE IF
ANYTHING THAT WAS UNCONVENTIONAL
AT THE TIME MIGHT EXPLAIN WHAT
THESE CREWS WERE PICKING UP.
THE FACT THAT THE MILITARY GOT
TO THIS SITE QUICKLY AND REMOVED
THE ALLEGED DEBRIS HAS
FRUSTRATED UFO RESEARCHERS FOR
YEARS. BUT WHAT IF THEY WERE NOT
THE FIRST TO ARRIVE? THERE ARE
RUMORS THAT LOCAL RANCHERS LIKE
MACK BRAZEL GOT TO THE CRASH
SITE BEFORE THE MILITARY. AND
ACCORDING TO TOM'S RESEARCH,
THEY MAY HAVE ACTUALLY COLLECTED
SOME OF THE WRECKAGE AND HIDDEN
IT IN NEARBY CAVES.
>> WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS
SEE IF THERE'S ANY TRUTH TO
THESE STORIES, MAYBE IN
THE CAVES.
>> PAT HEADS OUT TO MEET
SUE MANIS, A LOCAL RANCHER
WHOSE FAMILY HAS BEEN HERE SINCE
THE ROSWELL INCIDENT.
>> SO, THERE ARE OTHER PEOPLE
WHO COME OUT HERE LOOKING FOR
THE DEBRIS.
>> OH, YES.
>> WELL, WE'D LIKE TO TAKE
A STAB AT INVESTIGATING THIS
OURSELF. AND WE'RE HOPING MAYBE
YOU CAN HELP US FIND SOME OF
THESE CAVES.
>> WELL, I WILL TRY TO HELP YOU
FIND SOME OF THE CAVES. SOME ARE
EASY TO FIND. SOME ARE CAVED IN.
>> YOU THINK THERE'S A CHANCE
THAT MAYBE SOME OF THIS DEBRIS
IS IN THE CAVES?
>> WHERE THERE'S RUMOR, THERE IS
A POTENTIAL FOR THE TRUTH.
>> ACCORDING TO SUE'S FAMILY,
HER UNCLE WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
AT THE CRASH SITE. SHE POINTS
PAT IN THE DIRECTION OF A NEARBY
CAVE--ONE THAT HER UNCLE
SUPPOSEDLY VISITED OFTEN.
ONE THEORY IS THAT HE MAY HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO TAKE SOME OF
THE DEBRIS WITH HIM AND HID IT
THERE FOR SAFEKEEPING.
PAT HEADS OUT TO SEARCH...
AND AFTER SEVERAL ATTEMPTS,
FINDS A PROMISING SITE.
>> IF I WANTED TO GET RID OF
MY UFO DEBRIS, THIS WOULD BE
A NICE PLACE TO PUT IT. WHEW.
>> PAT'S DESCENT MUST BE
CAUTIOUS. THE ONLY THING TO
SECURE HIS LINE TO IS A SMALL
PIECE OF DESERT BRUSH.
THERE IS NO ESTABLISHED ROUTE
DOWN INTO THE CAVE.
>> UHH. GOT IT.
>> AND THERE'S NO WAY TO KNOW
WHAT MIGHT BE INSIDE.
>> DAMN IT.
WHEW. OK. WELL...WE'RE GONNA
HAVE A LOOK AND SEE WHAT'S
IN HERE.
[GRUNTING]
WELL, I'VE JUST DISCOVERED THAT
THE RUMORS ARE TRUE. THERE ARE
UNDERGROUND CAVES HERE NEAR
THE MACK BRAZEL DEBRIS FIELD.
AND THESE WOULD BE A GREAT PLACE
FOR PEOPLE TO STOW AWAY THIS
DEBRIS IF THEY WANTED TO HIDE IT
FROM MILITARY PERSONNEL. WHETHER
OR NOT THE DEBRIS IS ACTUALLY
DOWN HERE, UH, WE'LL SEE.
I CAN TELL FROM THIS LAYER OF
SILT HERE THAT THIS IS ALL
PROBABLY RAIN DRAINAGE THAT
PROBABLY COMES THROUGH THIS
TUNNEL. WE CAN SEE IT ON
THE OUTSIDE. THIS IS AS FAR AS
THE TUNNEL GOES. ALL I HAVE IS
HARD WALLS OF QUARTZ AND A SILTY
FLOOR. THAT'S ALL I'VE FOUND
DOWN IN THIS CAVE.
>> MANY DON'T REALIZE THAT THESE
CAVES BELOW THE DESERT EVEN
EXIST. AND PAT'S DISCOVERY OF
A CAVE NEAR SUE'S RANCH PUTS
THE RUMORS INTO PERSPECTIVE.
NOT ONLY DID THEY MAKE IDEAL
HIDING PLACES--THESE CAVES
ARE EVERYWHERE.
>> WHEW. THESE RANGES ARE
SO VAST, IT MIGHT TAKE MONTHS
TO FIND ALL THE CAVES
AROUND HERE THAT ARE AROUND
THE DEBRIS FIELD.
>> DESPITE THIS CONFIRMATION,
AFTER 60 YEARS, THE ALLEGED
FIRST CRASH SITE STILL HAS NOT
YIELDED ANY DEBRIS.
BUT THE FIRST PHYSICAL EVIDENCE
THAT COULD POINT TO A UFO HAS
EMERGED FROM THE SECOND CRASH.
>> LOOKS LIKE ORGANIC FORM.
>> FOR YEARS, THE ROSWELL CRASH
HAS DOMINATED THIS TINY CITY
AND THE NEARBY RANCHES.
BUT FEW HAVE PAID ATTENTION TO
ANOTHER ALLEGED UFO CRASH STORY
250 MILES WEST IN THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN THAT REPORTEDLY
HAPPENED THE SAME WEEK OF
JULY 1947. THE INVESTIGATION'S
NEXT STEP IS TO VISIT THE SECOND
CRASH SITE AND DETERMINE IF IT
HAS ANY CONNECTION TO ROSWELL.
>> WE'RE GOING TO MEET WITH
ART CAMPBELL, RESEARCHER WHO'S
BEEN STUDYING THIS SECOND SITE
THOROUGHLY. APPARENTLY, THERE'S
ALL KINDS OF SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
HERE TO SUPPORT THIS THEORY OF
A SECOND CRASH SITE. BASICALLY,
I'M HERE TO LOOK AT IT AND SEE
IF THERE'S ANY CREDENCE TO THIS.
>> SO, WHAT MAKES YOU THINK THIS
SITE HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH
A UFO CRASH?
>> WELL, AT FIRST, I WASN'T SURE
IT HAD ANYTHING TO DO WITH
A UFO CRASH. BUT I STARTED
FINDING THINGS.
>> CAMPBELL UNCOVERS SEVERAL
DIFFERENT ARTIFACTS DURING A DIG
IN 1995. HE CROSS-REFERENCES HIS
DIGS LOCATION WITH THE STORY OF
BARNEY BARNETT, WHO CLAIMED TO
HAVE FOUND A UFO CRASH SITE IN
THIS AREA IN JULY 1947.
>> BARNEY BARNETT WAS A LOCAL
SOIL CONSERVATION ENGINEER. AND
HE HAD A DISTRICT THAT WAS
70 MILES LONG, 72 MILES WIDE.
AND HE WAS ASSIGNED TO HELP
FARMERS WITH CONSERVATION
PROJECTS. IT WAS IN ONE OF
THE MAIN HIGHWAYS HE DROVE ON--
SAW SOMETHING GLINTING IN
THE SUN. HE TOLD FRIENDS AND
RELATIVES HE THOUGHT IT WAS
A PLANE CRASH. AND HE KNEW A WAY
IN. SO, HE DROVE OVER THERE AS
FAST AS HE COULD GET THERE AND
CAME OVER A SMALL RISE AND
LOOKED DOWN ON THIS UFO,
GLINT ON ONE SIDE, DOUBLE
BODIES OUTSIDE.
>> WHAT HAPPENED TO
THE VEHICLE AND THE BODIES?
>> HE WAS THERE PROBABLY
A HALF-HOUR OR 45 MINUTES, AND
SOME ARCHAEOLOGISTS CAME UP.
>> ACCORDING TO BARNETT'S
ACCOUNT, THESE ARCHAEOLOGISTS
ARE RETURNING FROM A NEARBY DIG
WHEN THEY STUMBLE UPON BARNEY
AND THE UFO CRASH SITE. IN HIS
RESEARCH, CAMPBELL LOCATED
CORROBORATING DOCUMENTS FOR
BARNETT'S CLAIM.
ACCORDING TO THIS LETTER FROM
THE PEABODY MUSEUM AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY, ARCHAEOLOGIST
HERBERT W. DICK WAS WORKING
AT BAT CAVE IN THE PLAINS OF
SAN AUGUSTIN IN THE SUMMER OF
1947. BAT CAVE IS IN CLOSE
PROXIMITY TO THE SITE WHERE
ART PERFORMED HIS DIG.
>> THEN THE ARMY DROVE UP IN
SEVERAL VEHICLES--SAID, "OH,
THIS SIGHT IS SECURE," AND
CHASED THEM OFF.
>> AND AGAIN, THIS WAS
A COMPLETELY SEPARATE CRASH
SITE. HE DIDN'T SEE THE CRASH
AT ROSWELL.
>> BUT WHAT EVIDENCE EXISTS THAT
SOMETHING CRASHED IN THE PLAINS
OF SAN AUGUSTIN?
>> ALL RIGHT. SO, THE THEORY IS
THAT SOME CRAFT CRASHED INTO
THIS, HIT YOU, CRASHED IN
THE EARTH. IT WOULD HAVE LEFT
A LONG GOUGE, WOULDN'T IT HAVE?
>> YES. I BET THE GOUGE WOULD BE
MAYBE ABOUT 200 FEET LONG.
>> AND DO YOU THINK MIXED UP IN
THE SOIL HERE WOULD BE SOME
COMPONENTS OF THE VEHICLE
OR WRECKAGE?
>> I BELIEVE THAT'S THE CASE,
YES. WHATEVER IT WAS CAME INTO
THAT SAGEBRUSH AND CUT A SWAB
TO IT.
>> THE SITE HAD NUMEROUS
ARTIFACTS THAT CAMPBELL
COLLECTED AFTER PERSISTENT AND
THOROUGH DIGGING. THIS IS
THE FIRST TIME HE'S BEEN BACK
TO THE SITE IN ALMOST 5 YEARS.
HE SPECIFICALLY REQUESTS THAT
THE ACTUAL LOCATION NOT
BE REVEALED.
>> GREAT.
>> YOU KNOW, I'VE SEEN THIS
STUFF AT ROSWELL. RESEARCHERS
HAVE RESEARCHED ROSWELL FOR
YEARS. BUT THIS IS ALL NEW
INFORMATION. NOT TOO MANY PEOPLE
KNOW ABOUT THIS SITE HERE IN
SAN AUGUSTIN. SO, WE'LL BE
THE FIRST TO REALLY INVESTIGATE
THIS AREA WITH ART CAMPBELL.
SO, YOU'RE SAYING THIS IS
WHERE BARNEY BARNETT SAID
THE CRASH WAS.
>> YES. I AM.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE
ARCHAEOLOGISTS? IS THIS ALSO
WHERE THEY SAW THE OBJECT?
>> THE ARCHAEOLOGISTS CAME FROM
THIS DIRECTION. THAT'S WHERE
BAT CAVE IS.
>> BUT THE PRESENCE OF BAT CAVE
WAS JUST CIRCUMSTANTIAL. SO,
ART TURNED TO AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL
DIG TO FIND PHYSICAL PROOF OF
A CRASH.
>> SO, IN THEORY, UH, THE OBJECT
CAME AND CRASHED IN FROM
WHAT DIRECTION?
>> A FLAT DIRECTION FROM
THE NORTHEAST.
>> AND RIGHT CAME--AND CRASHED
THROUGH HERE.
>> RIGHT. THAT'S WHAT WE
FIGURE, YEAH.
>> BEFORE HIS EXCAVATION,
CAMPBELL TOOK AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS
OF THE AREA. SEVERAL FORMER
WATER CHANNELS CAN BE SEEN
MOVING ON A SOUTHWESTERN COURSE.
BUT CAMPBELL NOTICED A SEPARATE
GAP MOVING IN THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION OF THESE NATURAL
COURSES AND FOCUSED HIS
DIG HERE.
>> HOW DID YOU DETERMINE THAT
THIS AREA HERE WAS A TRENCH?
>> BECAUSE THE SOIL WAS
DIFFERENT. I HAD 21 TEST HOLES
DUG ONE EVENING, 7 UP EACH SIDE
OF THE SAGEBRUSH, AND ONE DOWN
THE CENTER WHERE WE'RE STANDING.
THE SOIL IN THE CENTER OF THIS
WAS DIFFERENT.
>> AND THAT GAVE YOU SORT OF
THE HUNCH THAT SOMETHING WAS
GOING ON HERE?
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> THE WAY ART DESCRIBES THE
CASE IS, THE VEHICLE CAME IN.
YOU CAN SEE A BIT OF, YOU KNOW,
WHAT SEEMS TO BE AN ALLEY
THROUGH THE SAGE. IT COULD BE
NATURAL. IT COULD BE CAUSED BY
SOME EFFECT--FOR EXAMPLE,
A FILLED AREA WHERE THE SAGE
DOESN'T WANT TO GROW BACK INTO.
SO, IT'S RELATIVELY CONSISTENT.
THAT COULD BE A NATURAL EFFECT.
I CAN'T PROVE IT EITHER WAY.
>> BUT ONE OF THE ARTIFACTS THAT
ART UNCOVERED IN HIS DIG MAY
PROVIDE THE NECESSARY PROOF.
>> LET'S HAVE A LOOK AT THESE
ARTIFACTS YOU RECOVERED.
>> THIS WAS A PIECE I FOUND
UNDER THE SAGEBRUSH THAT KICKED
THE WHOLE INVESTIGATION OFF.
>> ALL RIGHT. HUH. LOOK AT THAT.
>> I WAS OUT HERE DIGGING.
>> WELL, IT CERTAINLY LOOKS LIKE
SOMETHING, UH, IN A SORT OF
AN ORGANIC FORM OR MELTED.
>> CAMPBELL UNCOVERS
THE ARTIFACT IN THE SAME GAP
THAT HE BELIEVES INDICATES
A UFO CRASHED HERE. IT IS
SMOOTH, LIGHTWEIGHT, AND APPEARS
TO HAVE MELTED OR COLLAPSED IN
ON ITSELF.
>> DIDN'T DARE THINK IT WAS
ANYTHING UNUSUAL. I TOOK IT UP
TO THE RESTAURANT HERE AND PUT
IT IN FRONT OF 2 CATTLE
INSPECTORS. AND THEY SAID, "THAT
AIN'T NO PART OF NO COW." AND
THEN I WAS OFF AND RUNNING WITH
MY RESEARCH.
>> MM-HMM. HAVE A LOOK AT THAT.
>> WOW. THAT IS REALLY
WEIRD-LOOKING.
>> WHAT I REALLY WANT TO DO IS
GET THIS ARTIFACT BACK TO THE
LAB AND TEST IT. I MEAN, TO ME,
IT'S THE MOST INTRIGUING ASPECT
OF THIS CASE. YOU KNOW, FIRST
THING--I WANT TO KNOW WHAT IT'S
MADE OF. IS IT ORGANIC? IS IT
INORGANIC? AGAIN, WE'RE JUST
LOOKING FOR SOMETHING REALLY
UNUSUAL HERE. OR IS IT
ALL EXPLAINABLE?
>> WITH THE FIELDWORK COMPLETE,
THE INVESTIGATION MOVES TO
AN EXPERIMENT THAT WILL PUT BOTH
THE GOVERNMENT EXPLANATION AND
THE EYEWITNESSES TO THE TEST.
>> YOU GOT SOMETHING THERE.
>> IN 1947, FOR ONE DAY,
THE U.S. MILITARY SAID THAT IT
HAD RECOVERED A FLYING SAUCER.
DAYS LATER, THEY RECANT. THEN,
IN THE 1990s, THEY ADMIT
SOMETHING DID CRASH. BUT IT WAS
A TOP-SECRET MILITARY EXPERIMENT
CALLED PROJECT MOGUL.
AFTER VISITING 2 ALLEGED UFO
CRASH SITES, THE INVESTIGATION
IS ATTEMPTING TO TEST
THE GOVERNMENT EXPLANATION FOR
THE ROSWELL INCIDENT--A PROJECT
MOGUL BALLOON.
PAT IS MEETING WITH
MICHAEL KEANE, A MILITARY
TACTICS EXPERT AND LECTURER AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA TO DISCUSS THIS
MUCH-DEBATED ANSWER FOR ROSWELL.
>> AT THAT TIME,
THE UNITED STATES HAD A MONOPOLY
ON ATOMIC WEAPONS. BUT WHAT IF,
UNKNOWN TO THE UNITED STATES,
THE SOVIETS HAD ACQUIRED
AN ATOMIC BOMB? WHAT WE REALLY
FEARED WAS AN ATOMIC
PEARL HARBOR OR A NUCLEAR 9/11.
AND SO, WE UNDERTOOK A CRASH
PROGRAM CALLED PROJECT MOGUL.
>> AND MOST PEOPLE THAT HAVE
LOOKED INTO ROSWELL KNOW ABOUT
PROJECT MOGUL. BUT MAYBE YOU CAN
GIVE ME SOME DETAILS AS TO WHY
THAT'S SUCH A VALID EXPLANATION.
>> IT WASN'T JUST ONE BALLOON.
IT WAS A STRING OF 20 TO 30
WEATHER BALLOONS FOLLOWED BY
AN EXTENSIVE PAYLOAD FOLLOWED BY
MAYBE HALF A DOZEN RADAR
REFLECTORS. IT WAS AN
EXTENSIVE OPERATION.
>> ORIGINALLY, PROJECT MOGUL
USED LONG STRINGS OF RUBBER
WEATHER BALLOONS TO CARRY
MICROPHONES AND RADIO
TRANSMITTERS. THESE TOOLS WERE
SENT HIGH INTO THE ATMOSPHERE TO
LISTEN FOR SOUND WAVES FROM
SOVIET MISSILE AND BOMB TESTS.
>> THIS IS PROBABLY CLOSE TO
700 FEET LONG, WHICH IS, YOU
KNOW, GREATER THAN HALF
THE HEIGHT OF THE EIFFEL TOWER.
>> BUT WOULD IT REALLY LOOK LIKE
DEBRIS? I MEAN, THESE GUYS
CLEARLY DESCRIBED VERY STRANGE
DEBRIS THAT THEY'VE NEVER
SEEN BEFORE.
>> AS PART OF THE PAYLOAD
DROPPED OFF, THE BALLOON COULD
RISE AGAIN. WINDS COULD DRAG IT.
IT COULD FALL AGAIN. IT COULD
CREATE MULTIPLE TYPE OF DEBRIS
SITES--OR AN EXTENSIVE DEBRIS
FIELD, FOR THAT MATTER.
>> SO, THIS MIGHT EXPLAIN THESE
MULTIPLE CRASH SITES.
>> ABSOLUTELY. SURE.
>> IF THE MOGUL BALLOON IS THE
REAL EXPLANATION FOR ROSWELL,
THEN EYEWITNESSES WHO HANDLED
THE DEBRIS SHOULD BE ABLE TO
IDENTIFY THE MYLAR FOIL USED IN
THE RADAR REFLECTORS.
BUT MANY DESCRIBE A STRANGE
MEMORY METAL THAT IS BOTH
LIGHTWEIGHT AND ABLE TO RETURN
TO ITS ORIGINAL FORM. WHAT DID
THESE WITNESSES HANDLE?
AT WONDERWORKS, A SPECIAL
EFFECTS HOUSE LOCATED IN
LOS ANGELES, BILL HAS BROUGHT IN
2 EYEWITNESSES FOR THE TEST--
EARL FULFORD, WHO CLAIMS TO HAVE
HANDLED THE DEBRIS AT THE
ALLEGED FIRST CRASH SITE, AND
JESSE MARCEL JR., WHO SAYS HE
HANDLED MATERIAL WHEN HIS
FATHER, MAJOR JESSE MARCEL,
BROUGHT SOME OF THE DEBRIS HOME
FROM THE CRASH SITE.
>> WE'VE COLLECTED A NUMBER OF
DIFFERENT MATERIALS THAT SEEM TO
MATCH ROUGHLY THE DESCRIPTIONS
FROM OUR 2 WITNESSES. WE'RE
GONNA BRING IN EACH WITNESS
INDEPENDENTLY AND SEE IF THEY
CAN POSITIVELY I.D. THE MATERIAL
THEY WERE HANDLING BACK IN 1947.
>> I GOT A HANDFUL OF DIFFERENT
METALS HERE. WE'RE STARTING OFF
WITH .032 MAGNESIUM--SAME WITH
STEEL, ALUMINUM, ALSO STEEL. BUT
THIS IS IN .005. YOU CAN SEE
IT'S QUITE FLEXIBLE AND FLAT.
THIS IS ACTUALLY CARDBOARD AT
.032--AND .005 ACETATE WITH KIND
OF AN ALUMINUM FINISH TO IT.
AND THIS IS MYLAR, ALSO WITH
AN ALUMINUM FILM TO IT.
>> EARL, THE FIRST SUBJECT, IS
BROUGHT IN TO LOOK AT
THE MATERIALS.
>> TAKE A TURN ON EACH PIECE
AND TELL ME YES OR NO--
DOES IT LOOK OR FEEL LIKE
THE PIECE OF METAL FROM 1947?
>> NO. IT'S A LITTLE TOO THICK.
>> LET'S DO THE NEXT ONE.
>> THIS ONE...IS TOO HEAVY.
THE COLOR IS CLOSE, BUT WEIGHT
IS TOO MUCH.
>> OK.
>> THIS MATERIAL, NOW, WAS
ALMOST WEIGHTLESS.
>> LET'S DO THE NEXT ONE.
>> TOO STIFF.
THIS ONE IS CLOSER,
BUT IT DOESN'T FEEL LIKE
I COULD FOLD IT UP.
THIS ONE DOESN'T RESEMBLE IT
IN ANY WAY.
THIS ONE FEELS MORE LIKE
THE MATERIAL. THE MATERIAL WE
GOT, WE COULD WAD UP, AND IT
WOULD POP BACK JUST ABOUT LIKE
THAT'S DOING NOW.
>> THIS ONE, YOU FEEL LIKE
THE THICKNESS IS ABOUT RIGHT,
THE WEIGHT--
>> THICKNESS AND THE WEIGHT--
>> AND THE STIFFNESS?
>> MAKES CHILLS RUN DOWN
MY BACK.
>> NOW, LET'S GET THIS LAST ONE.
>> DEFINITELY NOT.
>> YOU MENTIONED SOMETHING THAT
WAS REALLY INTRIGUING TO ME,
WHICH IS THIS IDEA THAT YOU
TRIED TO CRUMPLE IT UP, PUT IT
BACK IN YOUR BAG. CAN YOU TRY
ACTUALLY DOING IT AND SEE IF YOU
CAN GET THAT SAME EFFECT?
>> YOU GOT SOMETHING THERE.
THAT'S DEFINITELY...AS CLOSE AS
WHAT I'VE SEEN.
>> THE ACETATE SEEMS TO BE
A CLOSE MATCH FOR WHAT EARL
EXPERIENCED. BUT ACCORDING TO
THE OFFICIAL ROSWELL REPORT
RELEASED IN 1994, THIS TYPE OF
ACETATE WAS NOT USED IN THE
CONSTRUCTION OF PROJECT MOGUL
BALLOONS. ONLY ACETATE TAPE WAS
USED, WHICH BARES NO RESEMBLANCE
TO THE FORM OF ACETATE BEING
TESTED. BUT IF A BALLOON DIDN'T
CRASH AT ROSWELL, WHAT DID?
ANOTHER EYEWITNESS MAY CONFIRM
OR DENY THE FINDINGS SO FAR.
>> WELL, WE HAVE ONE MORE
WITNESS--ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS
OF THE ROSWELL WITNESSES--
JESSE MARCEL JR.
>> THE NIGHT THAT MY DAD BROUGHT
THE MATERIAL HOME, I LOOKED AT
ALL THIS MATERIAL ON THE FLOOR.
THE FIRST THING HE SAID WAS,
"LOOK AT THIS, 'CAUSE YOU'LL
PROBABLY NEVER SEE THIS AGAIN."
>> NOW, REMEMBER, THIS IS
A BLIND TEST. SO, LET'S NOT LEAD
ON ABOUT ANY OF THESE EARLY
FINDINGS WITH EARL.
>> THIS IS A SHEET METAL. NOW,
WHAT I SAW WAS NOT REALLY LIKE
A SHEET METAL. IT WAS MORE LIKE
A FOIL. SO, THIS IS MUCH
TOO THICK.
>> TOO THICK?
>> NOW, THESE ARE SHEET METAL.
WHAT I SAW, THE FOIL, WAS NOT
SHEET METAL.
THIS IS GETTING CLOSE TO THE
FEELING OF THE THICKNESS OF IT.
IT WAS NOT AS SHINY AS THIS,
THOUGH. IT WAS A LITTLE MORE
DULL THAN THIS. BUT THIS IS
CLOSER TO THE ACTUAL THICKNESS.
>> LET'S HAVE A LOOK AT
THIS ONE LAST.
>> YEAH, THIS IS VERY
INSUBSTANTIAL. THIS IS, LIKE,
A REAL THIN FOIL.
>> MM-HMM.
>> THE FOIL THAT I SAW WAS MUCH
THICKER THAN THIS. BUT
ACTUALLY--IT HAD ABOUT THE SAME
WEIGHT, THOUGH. IT WAS THICKER,
BUT ABOUT THE SAME WEIGHT--
>> ALMOST WEIGHTLESS.
>> AS THIS. IT WAS ALMOST
WEIGHTLESS. SO, IT COULD FLOAT
DOWN LIKE THAT IN THE AIR.
>> BUT DOES THE ACETATE ALSO
DISPLAY THE MEMORY METAL
PROPERTIES THAT JESSE'S
FATHER DESCRIBED?
>> YOU WANT TO TRY AND
CRUMPLE IT?
>> DOESN'T STAY CRUMPLED.
>> IS THAT WHAT HE DESCRIBED?
>> YEAH. THIS IS BASICALLY WHAT
HE DESCRIBED.
>> UNBEKNOWNST TO EITHER OF
THEM, BOTH EARL AND JESSE HAVE
IDENTIFIED ACETATE AS
THE MATERIAL CLOSEST TO WHAT
THEY HANDLED BACK IN JULY 1947.
>> THE AMAZING THING WAS,
IS THAT BOTH OF THEM ZEROED
RIGHT IN ON THE ACETATE.
IT'S PLAIN AS DAY TO ME THAT
THEY BOTH FOUND THE THICKNESS,
THE MALLEABILITY, AND THE
OVERALL WEIGHT OF THE ACETATE TO
BE, LIKE, A ONE-TO-ONE MATCH.
THIS HAS BEEN REALLY PRODUCTIVE.
WHEN YOU THINK OF PEOPLE
BACK IN 1947 HANDLING ACETATE,
THAT SOUNDS LIKE A PRETTY
REVOLUTIONARY MATERIAL
BACK THEN.
>> THAT'S THE AMAZING THING FOR
ME, IS THAT IT WAS THE SIMPLE
SOLUTION. WE KEPT LOOKING FOR
SOMETHING MORE EXOTIC.
>> ACETATE IS A POPULAR
COMPONENT IN FILM STOCK,
ADHESIVE TAPE, AND SYNTHETIC
FABRICS. AS EARLY AS 1910, IT
WAS USED AS A GLUE-LIKE LIQUID
TO COAT AND STRENGTHEN FABRIC
AIRCRAFT WINGS AND FUSELAGES.
BUT ACETATE IN A STRIP OR SHEET
FORM WAS NOT USED IN ANY KNOWN
AIRCRAFT IN THE 1940s.
>> THERE WAS NO ACETATE IN
A PROJECT MOGUL BALLOON. SO,
WHAT DID WE PROVE TODAY? WE DID
PROVE SOMETHING. WE PROVED THAT
2 WITNESSES WHO DIDN'T KNOW
EACH OTHER, WHO WERE THERE AT
THE TIME, IDENTIFIED THE EXACT
SAME MATERIAL.
>> IF THE UNKNOWN MATERIAL
HANDLED BY EYEWITNESSES WAS
ACETATE, IS IT FROM AN ENTIRELY
DIFFERENT CLASSIFIED PROJECT?
THIS STRANGE ARTIFACT COULD SHED
MORE LIGHT ON WHAT HAPPENED AT
2 DIFFERENT SITES IN NEW MEXICO
IN 1947.
>> IT MUST HAVE BEEN
AN EXPLOSION.
>> 2 EYEWITNESSES WHO CLAIM TO
HAVE HANDLED DEBRIS IN ROSWELL
HAVE IDENTIFIED ACETATE AS
THE CLOSEST MATCH FOR WHAT THEY
SAW IN 1947. BUT ACETATE WAS
NEVER USED IN A PROJECT MOGUL
BALLOON. IN EFFECT, THESE
WITNESSES HAVE ALL BUT
ELIMINATED THE GOVERNMENT'S
MOGUL BALLOON EXPLANATION.
SO, THE QUESTION STILL REMAINS,
WHAT CRASHED IN 1947, AND WHAT
WAS IT MADE OF?
IF THE SECOND CRASH IN
SAN AUGUSTIN IS TRULY LINKED TO
ROSWELL, THE FINAL ANALYSIS OF
THIS ARTIFACT MAY HOLD
THE ANSWERS.
TED BRINGS THE ARTIFACT TO
SEAL LABS IN LOS ANGELES AND
DR. ARUM KUMAR, A METALLURGY
AND SAMPLE PROCESSING EXPERT,
FOR A CLOSER EXAMINATION.
>> I BROUGHT THE SPECIMEN IN.
BEEN LOOKING FORWARD TO SHOWING
IT TO YOU. HERE IT IS.
>> WOW. WHAT IS IT?
>> THIS CAME OUT OF AN
ARCHAEOLOGICAL DIG. AND THE SITE
MAY HAVE BEEN A CRASH SITE.
WE'RE NOT SURE. THIS IS ONE OF
THE MORE UNUSUAL OR DIFFICULT TO
EXPLAIN ARTIFACTS--CAME UP AT
THE SITE.
>> IT DOES LOOK PRETTY UNUSUAL.
>> AND WE'RE JUST TRYING TO GET
A SENSE OF WHAT IT COULD BE.
IS IT ORGANIC? IS IT MAN-MADE?
IS IT NATURAL?
>> WELL, WE'LL TEST IT AND
FIGURE THIS OUT. I THINK WE
SHOULD DO A VARIETY OF TESTS
ON THIS.
>> THESE TESTS WILL HELP PROVE
CONCLUSIVELY WHAT THE OBJECT IS
MADE OF.
THE ARTIFACT IS SMOOTH TO THE
TOUCH AND, AT JUST 4 OUNCES, IS
EXTRAORDINARILY LIGHTWEIGHT. BUT
INITIAL LOOKS REVEAL SEVERAL
CRACKS AND FOLDS THAT SUGGEST
THERE MAY BE MULTIPLE LAYERS TO
THE OBJECT.
>> YOU SEE THERE'S ALL KINDS OF
FOLDS AND SORT OF CREVICES.
HAVE YOU EVER SEEN ANYTHING LIKE
THIS BEFORE?
>> NOTHING OF THIS SHAPE
AND FORM. OBVIOUSLY, IT LOOKS
PRETTY UNUSUAL.
>> THE CRACKED, OPEN AREAS OF
THE FISSURES MIGHT HAVE SOME
MATERIAL DOWN INSIDE THAT WE
COULD PULL OUT.
>> RIGHT.
>> WHILE TED AND DR. KUMAR TAKE
A CLOSER LOOK INSIDE THE OBJECT,
2 SAMPLES OF THE ARTIFACT ARE
TESTED TO DETERMINE WHAT THE
OBJECT IS MADE OF, AS WELL AS
ITS MELTING POINT.
KNOWING WHAT TEMPERATURE IS
NEEDED TO MELT THE OBJECT COULD
GIVE A CLUE AS TO THE CONDITIONS
THAT LED TO IT TAKING THIS FORM.
>> WE HAVE THIS OBJECT HERE
WE NEED TO EXAMINE IN
THE ELECTRON MICROSCOPE.
>> ALSO, IF--YOU KNOW, IN SOME
OF THESE CREVICES, IT LOOKS TO
BE SOME BITS OF MATERIAL OR
A POWDER DOWN THERE.
>> TED AND DR. KUMAR LOCATE
A FEW PARTICLES TO EXAMINE FROM
INSIDE THE OBJECT. RUNNING THESE
PARTICLES THROUGH THE SCANNING
ELECTRON MICROSCOPE SHOWS A
BREAKDOWN OF ITS BASIC ELEMENTS.
>> OK. SO, WHAT WE SEE HERE IS
A LARGE AMOUNT OF OXYGEN AND
CARBON, WHICH WILL BE COMPONENT
FROM THE ORGANIC MATERIAL.
>> MM-HMM.
>> AND IT ALSO CONTAINS QUITE
A BIT OF, UH, FILLER MATERIAL,
SO TO SAY. A BIT OF THIS
MATERIAL COMES FROM SAND AND
SOIL AND DIRT AS WELL.
>> NOTHING ANOMALOUS IS FOUND
FROM THE PARTICLE INSIDE
THE OBJECT.
BUT THE RESULT OF THE ARTIFACT'S
MAKEUP PROVE SURPRISING.
>> HEY.
>> HI.
>> WHAT DID YOU FIND?
>> I GOT A NICE, CLEAN SPECTRUM
AND JUST RAN IT THROUGH
THE DATABASE. AND IT'S
CLEARLY POLYETHYLENE.
>> POLYETHYLENE?
>> AND EVEN MORE SO, IT HAS
A HIGH MELTING POINT. IT HAS
ABOUT 130 DEGREES C, WHICH MEANS
IT'S HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE.
>> WHAT WOULD THAT COME FROM?
WHAT WOULD BE--COMMON
CONTAINERS OR...
>> TUPPERWARE.
>> BUT HDPE, OR HIGH-DENSITY
POLYETHYLENE, ISN'T USED
COMMERCIALLY IN PRODUCTS LIKE
TUPPERWARE UNTIL THE EARLY
1960s. AND THE MATERIAL ITSELF
ISN'T OFFICIALLY INVENTED UNTIL
1953, 6 YEARS AFTER THE ALLEGED
CRASHES AT ROSWELL AND
SAN AUGUSTIN.
IF ART CAMPBELL FOUND
THE ARTIFACT AT THE SITE OF
THE SECOND CRASH, IT EITHER
FOUND ITS WAY TO THE MIDDLE OF
THE DESERT SOMETIME AFTER 1953,
OR IT'S PART OF A CRASH THAT
HAPPENED 6 YEARS BEFORE
ITS INVENTION.
TODAY, HDPE IS NOT ONLY USED IN
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS BUT ALSO TO
MAKE FUEL TANKS AND AIRCRAFT
WINDOWS. HOW COULD SOMETHING
WITH SUCH A HIGH MELTING POINT
BECOME SO DEFORMED?
>> THIS WAS FOUND IN THE DESERT
IN NEW MEXICO, WHICH IS HOT, BUT
NOTHING GETS THAT HOT.
>> THAT'S 250 DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT? SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
>> EVEN IN DIRECT SUNLIGHT.
SO, WE KNOW THIS DIDN'T
MELT JUST BASED ON
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS.
>> CORRECT.
>> IT MUST HAVE BEEN PUT INTO
A FIRE OR AN EXPLOSION OR
SOMETHING TO ELEVATE ITS HEAT.
>> YES. THAT'S TRUE.
>> PROJECT MOGUL DIDN'T USE
ACETATE OR ANY OTHER MATERIAL
LIKE IT. AND NOW, THE REMOTE
SITE OF A SECOND CRASH CONTAINS
MATERIAL THAT MAY HAVE BEEN IN
AN EXPLOSION.
>> WE KNOW THE DESERT
ENVIRONMENT IN THAT AREA NEVER
GETS OVER 110, 120 DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT. BUT WE ALSO KNOW
THAT HDPE DOESN'T MELT BELOW
130 CELSIUS. SO, I WONDER, HOW
DID THIS OBJECT GET MELTED IN
THE DESERT THERE? IT WOULD HAVE
TO HAVE BEEN SOMETHING LIKE
A FIRE OR AN EXPLOSION TO REACH
THOSE TEMPERATURES.
>> THIS PROVIDES AN ENTIRELY NEW
PERSPECTIVE. FOR YEARS,
THE GOVERNMENT DENIES ANYTHING
HAPPENED AT ROSWELL BUT THEN
ADMITS TO SECRET TESTS. NOW,
THIS PHYSICAL EVIDENCE RAISES
SERIOUS DOUBTS ABOUT THOSE
FINAL EXPLANATIONS.
>> WHEN YOU PUT ALL THE PIECES
TOGETHER--MULTIPLE CRASH SITES,
INCREDIBLE WITNESSES THAT CAN
FINALLY COME OUT AND TELL THE
TRUTH AFTER ALL THESE YEARS--
YOU HAVE SOMETHING THAT'S JUST
TOO BIG TO BE A SIMPLE COVER-UP
OF A MILITARY ACCIDENT.
>> AND THE MOGUL EXPLANATION
ALSO CANNOT ACCOUNT FOR
EARL FULFORD'S SIGHTING
DAYS BEFORE THE CRASHES
EVEN OCCUR.
>> EVEN BEFORE THE UFOs HIT THE
GROUND, THEY WERE THERE IN THE
AIR. AND FOR ME, THAT EXPLAINS
THE RELATIONSHIP AMONG ALL THESE
VARIOUS CRASH SITES THAT THERE
WAS MORE THAN ONE CRAFT.
>> 61 YEARS AFTER THE INCIDENT
AT ROSWELL, NEW EVIDENCE
CONTINUES TO EMERGE. IS THIS
A DIFFERENT MILITARY PROGRAM
STILL CLASSIFIED TODAY...
OR IS THE GOVERNMENT STILL NOT
TELLING US THE TRUTH ABOUT
UFO CRASHES IN NEW MEXICO?